Everything we have discussed before is directly related to motivation.
What is motivation? Let's look at it again.
In order to make all the tasks set before the organization or before a person
during the annual interview or in the planned trial period
were achieved, it is not enough to have only a set of qualified personnel.
Really? Why?
Because it is necessary to organize the work in such a way
that everyone puts the maximum effort to perform the tasks set.
And this is already difficult.
And this is really management.
And how to organize the work of people so that they put the maximum effort,
not to sit at work from one call to another.
This is already management art.
By the way, in management courses,
they read a lot of different subjects.
Marketing, economics, finance.
All this is very important, all this is necessary.
Without it, it is impossible.
Maybe because I am a director of personnel,
so it seems to me that the most important aspect of management is human resources.
But maybe not only because of this.
Everything that happens is done by human hands and brains.
If we cannot manage people, we will not be able to manage the economy.
People make it.
We will not be able to manage marketing.
What is marketing?
If you buy some product, this product should be delivered by a person.
If you do not know how to manage these people, who will deliver the information?
Therefore, management of human resources,
motivation of these resources is the most important aspect of management.
Successful and unsuccessful managers are those who know how to manage the staff.
So, let's move on to the motivation function.
The eternal topic, the infinite.
We start this infinite topic, the insanely interesting topic.
What is it interesting about?
About the fact that any person wants to feel motivated when he goes to work.
He wants to do what he likes.
And to do so and to receive money for it,
so that he receives pleasure and satisfaction not only from work, but also from the reward.
And the company is interesting because it wants to have motivated employees,
who will work more and more effectively.
How to achieve this?
Almost like a fairy tale, almost an unfulfilled dream.
But in some companies it comes true, some companies strive for it.
One of the problems in today's market,
which organizations face in the field of stimulating employees,
is that two generally known principles are used.
Increase in salary or fired.
If you don't like it, you can quit.
We pay like this.
Someone works well, he was paid more.
That's it.
There are no other stimuli.
In principle, you can say, well, what is right?
A person works for money.
For the idea, of course, we are interested in a lot of different components when we get to work,
which we will talk about a little later.
But salary is an important factor.
Although, as many studies show,
salary is not the main criterion of evaluation when a person changes his job.
Look how interesting.
We often choose a job because we leave one and go to another, where they pay more.
On the other hand, when we leave a job,
the argument that I am leaving where I am paid more is not always the main one.
Even today in large Western companies,
managers are best known for some motivation theories.
Because motivation is a serious, important argument in any company.
And, of course, to know about various theories, approaches, trends,
what were, what are now,
and, in principle, you can even read what will be fashionable and what will be accepted on the market after a while.
Any manager or person who considers his career growth as managerial,
that is, a soldier who does not want to be a general,
so any general should know the basics of managing and managing people.
And the most important component is motivation.
Naturally, high efficiency and adequate stimulation of employees is an important function of management.
And it absolutely cannot be ignored.
It cannot be made very simple and it cannot be complicated,
but it is necessary to have an idea of ​​art of motivation.
And now let's talk about this art.
Question. Why do you work?
Is the question asked correctly?
Or better to ask why do you work in this position?
From your point of view, which question is more correct?
If we can answer the first question right away, why do you work?
The answer is, I work for money.
Then the second question, I work for money in this position,
is unlikely to be answered by a person right away,
because he will think about it, why I really work in this position.
Think about it, why do you work in the position you are in now?
Why?
Well, money is clear, not free.
And why else?
Let's try to answer these questions.
What motivates you to work in this or that position?
Behavior at work can be controlled by external and internal factors.
The external factor is the stimulus-reaction,
the internal factor is the behavior of a person at work,
and it is controlled by the influence on the inner world of a person, on his needs.
That is, I work in this position because my needs are being fulfilled,
I achieve something, I get satisfaction.
That is, a certain motivation.
Speaking of motivation and the theory of motivation,
let's start with the last century.
Capitalism was developing, it was 200 years old,
100 years have passed, it was developing,
and people began to think about why some companies are more successful,
others are less successful.
What makes people work more effectively,
and how many wolves do not feed, but look into the forest.
How to influence people to work?
Naturally, people began to be interested in these issues.
The very first thing that comes to mind is psychology.
At the turn of the centuries,
such an interesting science as psychoanalysis appeared.
Psychoanalysis was created at the end of the last century
by the Austrian scientist Sigmund Freud.
I think almost everyone knows Freud.
The personality is odious, the theory is known,
although probably more known as the theory of sleep, the theory of sex.
And few people now even associate it with the theory of psychoanalysis
from the point of view of even some motivational things.
Psychoanalysis also arose not from nothing.
The basis for this is psychology,
where psycho is the soul, and logos, as we know, is science.
This is a science about the patterns of the development and functioning of the psyche.
Do not confuse it with psychiatry, which deals with the violation of the functioning of the psyche.
By the way, there are really confused people here.
And psychoanalysis is also not psychiatry.
Freud's successors are the famous Jung,
as well as Alfred Alder, and some others.
In fact, it is probably better to be a successor than to create a direction.
Because, as a rule, the successor always argues with the founder's father.
Therefore, all his successors argued with Freud.
And the successors, based on his psychoanalysis, created their own theories, their own approaches,
argued with Freud's postulates.
But it is Freud who is the father of psychoanalysis.
And, in fact, the theory of human behavior is the first and one of the most influential theories of personality in psychology.
The theory of personality.
And usually it refers to the classical psychoanalysis created by Sigmund Freud.
By the way, many people forget about this.
That it was really a theory of personality in psychology, and this is a classical psychoanalysis.
The structure of the human psyche is distinguished by two spheres, the conscious and the unconscious.
The unconscious is the biological nature of a person and is governed by instincts.
The instinct of self-preservation, for example, which regulates the sensory sphere of natural needs.
I want to eat, I will go and eat.
Here the fire is dangerous, I will not go there.
The instinct of self-preservation.
And the conscious, which controls the unconscious and determines behavior in the public sphere, in the public environment.
There is a conflict between the conscious and the unconscious.
Then the balance between the two spheres of the psyche collapses.
Here psychoanalysis helps to understand the problem of this conflict.
The psyche is automatically regulated by the principle of satisfaction, which is modified in the principle of reality.
And with various violations, a reset is carried out through the unconscious sphere.
When some negative information accumulates and I cannot perceive it, I just reset it, I do not refuse it.
It is not there.
Later Freud worked out his views.
He conducted a lot of experiments.
I will not talk about it now, we will not dwell on it.
But his ego and super ego are really very well known.
The self and the super self.
The self is a part of a person's personality, which is in contact with the outside world.
The self and the super self are very interesting qualities.
This is what a person should do in society.
This is morality, this is honor, this is shame.
This is super ego.
Freud distributed such interesting things at different levels.
That is, I am the world and my morality, shame, honor, conscience.
Probably, conscience will be the key word in the super ego.
The super ego is my conscience.
My conscience, through this prism, I look at the world around me.
In this case, why do we dwell on Freud?
Because he is the father of psychoanalysis.
Many theories of motivation will use him as a basis.
Naturally, after rethinking, changing, improving, maybe even before recognition.
But he is the first brick on which a huge building called the theory of motivation is built.
At the same time, they lived at the same time.
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, Edith von Freud.
One in Russia, the other in Europe.
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, he developed, in general, he is a famous physiologist.
By the way, he became the first Russian Nobel laureate in 1903.
He studied the science of higher neural activity.
I think the first thing that comes to mind when any of us hears the surname Pavlov,
is the experience with dogs, these are conditional and unconditional reflections.
Again, conscious, unconscious, conditional, unconditional.
Everything is very interconnected.
As at the beginning of the last century, science developed in different countries in approximately the same direction.
Pavlov, the creation of the theory of conditional and unconditional reflections,
was another brick on which the Americans built their theories.
And they called themselves, of course, not they, later they were defined as behaviorists.
From the English word behave.
That is, those who studied behavior, conditional and unconditional reflections of behavior.
So, behaviorism, behavior, one of the directions in psychology.
If Freud is psychoanalysis, Pavlov is physiology, then it is psychology.
Psycho-soul, logos, science of the soul.
That is, it is one of the directions of the science of the soul.
The program was proclaimed in 1913 by the American researcher John Watson,
who believed that it was necessary to study not consciousness, but behavior.
That's where they are called behaviorists.
They studied the reaction of a person, his reaction to some things happening from the outside.
That is, to certain irritants, let's say, external.
Studying the direct connections of stimuli and reactions, reflexes,
behaviorism attracted the attention of psychologists to study the skills, skills and experience.
He opposed psychoanalysis.
Behaviorism initiated various psychological and psychotherapeutic schools.
By the way, today, not so fashionable as it was fashionable 10 years ago,
the so-called NLP, Neuro-linguistic programming.
It is very controversial how useful it is, how not useful it is,
what this NLP actually affects when it affects a person.
But the basis for NLP and behavioral therapy was behaviorism.
Freud, Pavlov and behaviorism.
These are three bricks on which various tendencies, schools, theories arose and collapsed.
It is interesting to note that the Americans had an ambiguous relationship with Sigmund Freud.
For example, psychoanalysis was almost devoted to anathemas and was considered a false science.
Although later they reduced the momentum a little and decided that it was not a false science,
that psychoanalysis could be used, but in psychiatry and only by those who have a doctor's diploma, a medical diploma.
People without such a diploma cannot do psychoanalysis in America.
Such things happened in the middle of the last century.
In our country, in the 30s, behaviorism was developing.
By the way, Bekhterev was one of those who considered and studied these issues.
But, as in many scientific trends of those years, they were unpopular, harmful.
It's almost like Weissman and Morgan in genetics, for which Vavilov suffered.
The same was here.
Such subtle things were considered wrong.
They did not agree with the concept of the construction of communism and socialism.
And as a science, it developed only abroad.
Why are we going to consider Western theories and Western scientists?
Because since the 30s, it was forbidden to do this.
Literally, for fear of death.
And there is only one hope that now, as the country develops,
as experience accumulates, maybe some of you will contribute to the creation of new theories, new trends.
Maybe some of you will be interested and will do this in your life.
And I am sure that in 10-15 years we will have our own scientists, academics, our own works, theories, schools.
I would really like to hope for this.
But for now, we will see everything that was created not by us, but before us.
We will see what we can use and how we can use it, how useful it can be.
And we will take something for granted and say, I know this, it's interesting, but in this case it is not applicable, because it has accelerated.
Or it does not match the views that I adhere to.
To management, to business, to motivation.
The Bifurcat theory of motivation.
The Bifurcats noted that the term motivation is too general and not scientific enough.
To be honest, I agree with them somewhere.
It is really very general and today there are so many different theories that it is more theoretical than scientific, although it can be scientific as well.
Experimental psychology, under this name, actually studies the needs.
We will talk a lot about this.
Or the attraction of the drive.
There is a theory of drives, that is, the theory of attraction.
By the way, now this is a very fashionable word, drive.
Do you have a drive or do you not have a drive to work?
Slang, which came to us quite recently, was used more than 80-70 years ago as one of the theories of motivation.
Do you have a drive? That is, a movement, an attraction, to do something.
I am motivated by work, some process.
I have a desire to drive.
Drive is like to lead, to manage.
I like to manage the process.
And, of course, these attractions had a purely physiological nature.
Behaviorists explained behavior through the scheme of stimulus-reaction.
Again, let's remember Pavlov.
This is their brick, on which they built their building.
Pavlov's dog.
Stimulus-reaction, unconditional and conditional.
And considering the stimulus as an active source of reaction.
Based on this, motivation began to be understood as a state.
I am motivated, I have a state that makes me do something.
Because the function of this state drives my body to move.
That is, I am motivated to act, live, work, think actively.
There is an external stimulator, of course, but it exists.
For example, what is the most active stimulator for motivation, for drive?
Our boss came and said,
Sidorov, come to the desk and do what I told you in the morning.
Great drive, motivation, reaction.
The boss said, under this reaction, I am quickly motivated,
I sit at the table like a bunny, I do everything.
Here is the stimulus-reaction.
Please, it doesn't work, it works, great.
The system is in action.
So, behaviorists considered motivation as a drive.
As something that had a purely physiological nature.
Stimulus-reaction.
What other theories arose?
The theory of reinforcement of motives.
The theory was new, but as we say, everything new is well forgotten old.
If we remember that the theory of reinforcement of motives had a hedonic theory,
and hedonism is an ethnic doctrine,
originally developed in the ancient Greek Kyrenean school of the 4th century BC.
It's not even the last century.
The goal of life and the highest good was to enjoy.
When I was preparing for this lecture, I read it with pleasure and thought,
how it corresponds to the spirit of our time.
Many people now enjoy the good and believe that the goal of life is to achieve the good and enjoy.
This is what they work for.
Motivation? Motivation.
Yes, this is their motivation.
Enjoyment is not a reward for the good, but the good itself.
This was the opinion of the philosophers and Epicureans of ancient Greece.
And they are philosophers.
It's interesting that enjoyment is not a reward, but a benefactor.
It's a deep philosophical thought, but we won't dwell on it.
Although you can think about it on the board.
The good is defined as something that brings enjoyment.
If something brings me pleasure, it's good.
And if it's suffering, it's evil.
It's simple and logical.
The Greeks formulated two principles, which are also very logical.
The Greeks were wise in many things, including medicine.
People strive to maximize pleasure.
It works now.
And people strive to minimize suffering.
It also works.
Why should I multiply my suffering when I can multiply my pleasure?
And live for pleasure.
A great theory.
It works for many.
It can be said to be the goal of life for a certain level.
It can be said that it's bad or good.
There are people who think it's good.
They accept it and they are effective.
Because it's motivation for them.
And for someone motivation is a completely different principle.
Absolutely different.
Taking the principle of hedonism as a basis,
Thorndike proposed the law of effect.
Behavioral reactions, which follow the perceived experience, are fixed.
But if the reaction follows unpleasant experience, they disappear.
Is it logical? Yes.
Again, motivation is a reaction.
Motivation with a plus.
I will remember it.
It's good.
If I did this job well,
and I did it like this, I will remember it.
And I was given a bonus for it.
I will remember it.
I will work like this.
But if I did it like this,
and I was told to fire me if I did it again,
I will not work like this.
Motivation and reaction.
It works.
There are many people and many options for different methods.
It's perfect to have employees who are all like a selection.
All from the same incubator.
And all listen to the same team.
And they are motivated by something simple and ordinary.
There are no such people.
Therefore, there are so many opinions and approaches.
Therefore, management of human resources is not only science.
It requires colossal endurance, calmness and good health.
So, not only Thorndike was engaged in the theory of motif reinforcement.
Ihal was engaged in this theory.
Let's pay attention again.
There is a father, a founder, a brick, and a large building grows on it.
Again, a brick and a building.
And then a plaza and a huge pyramid.
He, as a habit, understood the connection between the reaction and a specific stimulus,
which arose as a result of positive reinforcement or punishment.
He didn't offer anything radically different from Thorndike.
He just deepened and developed it.
He changed his mind a little.
In principle, the theory of motif reinforcement has several authors.
They looked at the same thing from different points of view.
This also has a right to life.
Skinner demonstrated that behavior can be effectively changed by reinforcing the desirable and ignoring the undesirable.
Let's manage people this way.
We will actively highlight and praise those who are effective.
And we will not react to those who do not work very well.
We will not scold them.
We will not offend them.
We will not close the doors to their reactions.
We will not let them do this.
By the way, this is a really interesting approach.
It can also be used today.
We can actively reward, raise salaries, motivate with education,
give vouchers for rest to all families,
to the best employees,
so that others would be envious of this theory,
but so that others would want to succeed next year.
I agree with him that he left the punishment.
Punishment can force, change behavior.
Punishment never leads to efficiency.
If we take the history of our country,
what has been talked about a lot in recent decades,
there were many films about the system of camps, the system of punishment.
One of the theories is that we have become such a power
because we want to ask the question,
if there were no camps,
maybe we would have become even more powerful,
even more interesting,
and maybe we would not have had such shocks.
Maybe punishment is not necessary.
An interesting point.
In this case, I like Skinner because he does not reject,
he just lowers the punishment.
Maybe in management, for some it is not his style,
and for some it is the style that a person was looking for,
or the one that he uses in everyday work.
There is a group of theorists,
let's say, theorists who are already closer to us in time,
who, using those bricks and foundations,
began to develop more deep
and motivated theories.
The most famous, the first brick in this pyramid,
is Abraham Maslow.
He is followed by Alderfer, McLelland,
and he is written and pronounced differently,
Herzberg,
but more often Herzberg,
if you see it written differently,
you mean that it is the same person.
Let's consider the theory of each of them.
All of them are based on the theory of Abraham Maslow,
so we will dwell on his theory in detail.
If you remember, a few slides ago I said
that even in Western companies,
although this theory is more than 40 years old,
the most common knowledge is Maslow's theory,
which is known by the management.
In principle, this theory is really interesting,
controversial, but in any case,
it reflects in great detail
the various motivational principles
that exist in a person.
Let's consider the motivational theory in detail.
After that, I advise you to return to this slide
and look at everything highlighted in blue.
What is the difference between them?
Although they are all based on the same thing.
Maslow's theory, the main brick,
the main one for building a pyramid.
Everyone later relied on this theory,
argued with it, agreed, disagreed,
refined, developed.
Abraham Maslow divided the needs
into primary and secondary.
There are five steps in total.
There are more detailed maps,
but if someone is interested,
he can already see the original source.
I do not advise reading any literature
on this topic,
any analytical one.
If you are interested,
read only the primary sources.
You are smart, educated, interested people.
Make your own conclusions,
analyze them yourself.
First, it will be your personal experience,
which will be reflected in your practice.
It is the individual, unique, exclusive.
And no one will tell you better than the primary source
about the theory of Maslow's hierarchy of needs,
like Maslow himself.
So, in this case, in this lecture,
these are the strokes, this is the quintessence.
If you want to dig deeper,
go to the primary source.
Read Freud, Maslow,
read someone else who interested you.
No, you will have enough knowledge
to understand where it comes from,
what is taken,
and what can be used for yourself.
That is, the main aspects,
the strokes, the Rakhmetov method.
We read only what we need,
if you want to go to the primary source for your soul.
So, Maslow.
Five steps.
The first, the simplest.
Water, air, food.
We can't live without it.
It's physiology.
These are our physiological needs.
The second step is safety.
It is really very important
to have stable work.
The third step is the need for social contacts,
belonging to an organization.
The fourth step is the need for recognition.
Look, each step adds.
It doesn't mean that if a person has a need for recognition,
he doesn't need a physiological need.
It's just that there is a need for recognition.
And the third step is the need for social contacts.
He doesn't need a physiological need for recognition.
It's one of the other things.
That's why it's a pyramid.
And the last and the highest is the need for self-expression,
for the disclosure of one's own abilities,
in creativity, in various relationships, in growth,
in everything.
Are all five steps inherent in everything?
Yes and no.
It depends on how much we need it today.
Imagine a person who is 20, 35 and 65 years old.
What needs will they have?
I think that a person who is 25
will have all five needs.
He will definitely need to disclose the need for self-expression.
For someone who is 65,
there will be enough safety needs.
He has already achieved everything in life.
He has seen everything.
He has been in all roles,
in all situations.
Now he is already old.
We all have a physiological need.
But he needs a stable pension,
medical care,
and safety needs for him.
So that no one attacks him on the street.
He will live his life in his country house,
reading books,
going to museums,
meeting friends.
He may not need social contacts.
For someone, they will need to go to the theater,
to the museum.
For someone, they will need self-expression.
Such people continue to work.
These are creative people,
these are unchanging leaders.
People work until the age of 80-90.
If we take people of science, actors,
and many other specialties,
it does not matter.
It can be a person of a working specialty,
who continues to work when he is over 70.
He has needs that do not allow him to stop
and calmly go to rest.
These needs
actually depend on the state
in which we see a person.
Either he becomes in a state of rest,
or he is looking for something in life,
because he is going further and further
on this ladder.
Let's start with the third stage.
The first, physiological, and the second
are very simple and understandable.
The third stage is social needs.
For us, a person,
in an organization,
what does it mean?
For the leaders,
how can I provide my employees
with this need?
How can I close it?
How can I create a single team at work?
How many trainings are there now,
even out-of-town,
on team building, on creating a team?
Here it is, the third need.
Periodically hold a general meeting,
both a general and a managerial one.
Do not destroy informal groups without need.
Why?
We have not yet talked about informal groups.
They exist in every organization,
absolutely in every one.
Some have a plus sign,
others have a minus sign.
There are formal and informal leaders.
Often, informal leaders
can be stronger than formal leaders.
How to influence and how to fight?
In theory, this is a topic of a separate lecture.
And it would be ideal to include
conflictology, psychology,
psychotypes,
managing conflicts
and stress resistance
in this topic.
All together.
Because it is a very serious and deep topic.
In principle,
the advice is this.
If there are informal groups,
it is not recommended to destroy them.
This is a fact.
But to try to control them,
or at least keep your hand on the pulse,
what happens?
What kind of leader? How does he influence?
Maybe he has a very positive influence on everyone.
Or vice versa.
What will be harmful for the organization?
Try to control without destroying.
Create conditions for the activity
of employees outside the organization.
Corporate holidays are very popular now.
There are no companies
where corporate holidays
were not held at least in the New Year.
In any. Absolutely.
General outings,
summer holidays,
barbecues, sports events.
For example,
a coffee shop is very important.
If you have a huge office
and there is a coffee shop on the floors,
where people can come to pour coffee,
tea, water, talk,
communicate,
it is very important.
By the way, I did not write,
but a smoking room
is also a place where a person
satisfies social needs.
This is a place where you can find out,
as in a coffee shop,
all the latest news,
gossip,
and hear at meetings.
An amazing place.
In many companies it is now forbidden to smoke,
so the center is in a coffee shop.
If there were no coffee shops,
it would probably be good to create them.
The fourth step.
The need for respect.
Indeed,
when I respect a person,
I trust him.
That is, by trusting, I can provide
a person with more substantive work,
evaluate and encourage employees,
show respect to them,
provide some additional rights,
impose some additional duties
on a person.
I trust, I respect a person,
I trust him
more authority.
A lot of things
can be done
in your team,
satisfying the need for respect.
Moreover, this need exists
in every person who works.
Any person,
any person who works,
wants to be respected,
appreciated in the team.
This is very important.
Any person
is pleased
to hear at least from time to time
that he or she likes
how you work.
Well done. This is very important.
Probably, without this,
there is no real leadership
of people.
People often react
to such comments
more emotionally,
there is a surge of
more efficiency than the bonus.
Well, the bonus is a bonus.
Yes, I earned it, it's nice.
But you work very well,
keep up, I'm watching you.
Well done.
It is often expensive.
Very expensive,
especially from the manager,
and if it is in the presence of comrades,
employees,
it is very important.
The last stage is self-expression.
It is not always achieved,
not everyone needs it.
For example, work that allows
to develop one's abilities,
one's potential,
or difficult work,
work that allows to make decisions on one's own.
In principle, this is already the leaders
of the highest link.
Work that allows them to make decisions on their own.
By and large,
it is like a disease,
like a strong drug.
In general, leadership is really a drug.
The ability to solve difficult tasks
is often fast.
Once we counted with colleagues
with managers of the highest link
how much time they often spend
on making difficult decisions.
These are top managers.
Managers who have the right
to solve strategic issues,
issues of the budget,
which can be changed
by a simple move of the story
in this company.
Often on very serious things.
After some work,
how much time do they spend?
Many said,
sometimes half a minute,
sometimes one and a half.
That is, a second.
Literally once,
I take responsibility.
Yes, I made a decision.
This is a drug,
but it is very important
for people of this kind.
Creative work, of course,
is also a certain drug,
natural self-expression
and getting new knowledge
and information.
Let's go back to the IT sector.
Getting new knowledge and information
is not only self-expression for them,
it is a necessary need.
Otherwise, they simply
do not have the right
to do it.
They are late for the market.
That is, what will be fashionable
in three years,
they must know now
and understand how it can be applied.
If they find out exactly in three years,
they will be late for three years
in the competition.
Maslow, bricks.
All the rest are built
on this brick.
Alderfer.
He reworked the hierarchy of needs a little.
Remember, right?
Freud, Jung and others
reworked his theory.
Pavlov, behaviorists,
reworked,
added to his theory.
The same here.
Brick, pyramid, brick, pyramid.
What did he change?
He proposed
to highlight three main groups
of needs.
What are these groups?
In general, this theory
is called
abbreviated ERG.
English abbreviation.
In Russian,
the first is existence.
That is, existence.
The second is relatedness.
That is, it is a belonging.
I translate it simply from English,
because in the text you see
a little, let's say, more scientific
translation.
And the needs of growth.
Growth is just development.
So,
existential needs.
That is,
existing needs.
This is the satisfaction of basic needs.
What are our basic needs?
Remember, the first and second steps.
The first and second.
Physiology, air, water, food and safety.
Polyclinic,
stable salary, pension.
Safety.
The second is social.
Belonging.
And the fourth step.
The third is belonging, the fourth is social.
We establish and support
significant contacts, connections,
interaction with other people.
These two steps
are combined into one.
So, the first and the second
are existential needs.
The third and the fourth are social needs.
And the fifth
are the needs of growth.
The self-expression.
Here is self-improvement,
personal growth,
needs of self-respect.
What did
Alderfer do
new?
He simplified the oil theory.
If we remember this theory,
there are not five steps,
but only three.
From the point of view of mathematics,
it is easier to remember three
than five.
From the point of view of
the content,
it is the same.
The next one.
The theory of Maclean.
The leading role of consciousness
in determining human behavior.
How interesting!
Here something sounds
from what we have already considered.
Conscious, unconscious.
Here is the leading role of consciousness.
A person has three
basic important needs.
What are they?
Here, with the oil,
he does not interfere.
This is something separate.
In that slide,
there are four theories.
Comments under his theory.
In comparison with the oil theory,
you will not find a blue highlight.
Because he really has a difference.
What are the three
important needs?
Power, success,
and involvement.
Involvement, by the way,
is correlated
with the needs of the oil.
Power.
The desire to influence other people.
Respect for self-expression in the oil.
A little differently,
Maclean's theory sounds.
Maybe even more rigidly,
more principled,
more accentuated.
What kind of people
have such needs?
They are good orators.
They demand high attention
from other people.
Leaders.
Leaders are energetic people.
They attract people.
They lead people.
Success.
Bringing work to
a successful completion.
People focused on the result.
Look how everything is interconnected.
We had corporate cultures.
The culture of power.
The culture of achievements.
The task, the result.
And here it is interconnected.
You can't consider
motivation separately,
the person in the company culture separately.
Everything is together.
Everything is interconnected.
Power, success, corporate culture
that chooses people
who have needs in power,
in management,
in success, and involvement.
These are people
who identify themselves
with the company.
They are involved in what happens
in the company, what is done there.
They build relationships.
They provide help.
They are ideal in communication.
These are people
who are
communicative,
sociable.
Everyone is absolutely interesting to them.
These are the three
interesting needs
that were highlighted by McLeod.
They are worth considering.
And the theory of two factors.
It is
the theory of Herzberg.
The theory was created
based on interviews
taken at various workplaces
in different professional groups
and in different countries.
The interviewers were asked to describe
the situation in which they felt
complete satisfaction and, on the contrary,
dissatisfaction with their work.
I can imagine
how difficult the surveys were,
how difficult it was to bring them together
and to draw some results.
But he did it successfully
and drew the theory of two factors.
The answers were classified
into two groups.
Studying the collected material,
Herzberg came to the conclusion
that satisfaction and dissatisfaction
with work are caused by
various factors.
The motivating factors are motivators.
The satisfaction factor is career growth.
Responsibility factor is
positive assessment of achievements.
The content of work is
the main motivator.
The factors of labor conditions
are hygienic factors.
The dissatisfaction factor is
the amount of salary
compared to competitors.
I don't like it
because I know that
competitors pay more
for the same work I do.
Indeed,
everyone is watching each other.
We should pay attention to the market.
There is no secret in the market.
Although everyone is very careful
about their salaries,
we have a very good information leak.
Benefits, social status,
guarantees
and influence on personal life.
This has become very popular
in recent years.
It is called
life and work balance.
Many companies
take this balance
as a value
in their values,
in their guidelines.
They guarantee
their employees
this unique balance.
They say that
they don't need to work
until death.
They say that
they don't need to work
until death.
They say that
they don't need to work
until death.
They say that
they need to sleep,
go to a visit,
spend time with friends.
They say that
it is not right
to work in a duodara.
It is not effective.
This is where
life and work balance
comes from.
It is from two-factor theory.
In order to effectively motivate
your subordinates,
the boss should understand
the essence of the problem.
The essence of the problem is the process.
If the theory we have just discussed,
the four,
the main subject of the video,
were called substantive,
the next theory we will discuss
is the process theory of motivation.
There are the substantive,
the process theory of motivation,
the main subject of the video,
and the next theory of motivation.
The process theory of motivation
is based on the fact
that a person
puts in his work
a certain amount of effort
that depends not only
on his needs but also
on certain aspects of the working situation.
A person distributes
the work to his subordinates.
There are three main process theories of motivation.
What are they?
The theory of expectation,
the presence of an active need
is not the only and necessary condition,
the presence of a need
is not the necessary condition
of motivation,
the theory of justice,
and the model of Porter-Lowler.
We'll discuss them later.
The theory of expectation.
The point is
why a person chooses
a certain line of behavior.
The theory of expectation
is based on the fact
that
active needs
are not
a necessary condition
for motivation
of a person to work.
I wonder
what are the keys
to this theory?
The key to this theory is
the result,
validity and expectation.
What is the result?
What are the interesting and strange keys?
It is anything related to the need
of behavior in the workplace.
What can be?
For example,
I am stressed,
which I got at work.
Salary, yes.
Respect from colleagues,
is it related to the need
and consequence
of behavior at work?
Validity is related to it.
Subjective satisfaction
with the result.
Subjective.
And expectation.
Expectation of successful performance
with the application
of the appropriate efforts.
I make an effort
and I expect
a reward.
These are my efforts
and my expectations for a reward.
Employees form expectations
related to the results
of their behavior using the preliminary experience.
For example,
they decide how likely
to make something meaningful for them.
Let's take a salesman as an example.
A successful salesman
thinks
that if he makes
more than 9 deals
per week,
and his percentage depends
on the quantity
and volume of the produced product,
he will get
a higher reward.
It is highly likely
that he will make a few more calls
to potential buyers.
It is a great motivation.
But when a salesman thinks
that the product is well used
and that additional sales
will not change the result,
that there will be no reward,
that he can leave work
in the afternoon
for additional efforts,
and so on,
will he make
additional efforts?
If a person is 100% sure
that his additional efforts
will lead to additional expectations,
that is,
they are realized,
that he made an effort
and his expectations were met,
then he will do it.
He will satisfy his needs
and he will work effectively.
If he is not sure of this,
he will not work effectively.
The theory of justice
is a very important one.
is the main postulate of this theory.
Employees evaluate
their relationships
by comparison.
The theory of justice
is one of the most effective theories.
We always look into the pocket of our neighbor.
Always.
And rarely
we compare something else
except for the salary.
I am in marketing, he is in marketing.
We do the same thing.
He thinks it can be different.
He thinks he does better, more,
more qualified.
I have my own subjective approach.
The theory of justice.
Since we are in the same position,
we are called Aditakov,
marketing manager,
we must get the same salary.
To be fair.
If I do not see justice,
I am not satisfied,
then, of course,
I strive to restore this justice.
I will hire my boss,
raise my salary.
What should I do to get a raise?
But Sidor in another department
gets other money.
There are two options.
Either I will be fired or I will get a raise.
Until people
start to think
they get a fair reward,
they will strive to reduce
the intensity of work.
While I go to my boss
and beg for a raise,
my efficiency is close to zero.
I am effectively busy
with the theory of justice
towards myself, my beloved.
But not towards
the efficiency of my work.
By the way,
the salary review
is held twice a year
in large companies.
They compare themselves
with IT specialists
in the market, banks, banks, etc.
Now there are more and more
professional companies
that make such reviews.
Hey Group,
which offers these reviews,
and Watson White,
a global supplier of salary reviews,
have been launched.
The Russian market
is getting more and more
industry-focused.
They hold this review twice a year
and it is very useful for employers.
Because you can always say to your employee,
my dear,
I have a good argument
that I pay you more than the market.
You will have good arguments.
The other question is
whether he will calm down
after this review.
It all depends on the person.
But it is always good
to have such an argument on the table.
The model of Porter-Lowry
contains features
of both the theory of expectation
and the theory of justice.
As usual,
the picture is the same,
just a little different.
But the same basic premise.
And they argue with it,
improve, finish.
The same here.
So, what have they changed
in these two theories
and what have they come to?
So, Lyman Porter
and Edward Lowler
have been launched
in the same year.
And Edward Lowler
has developed a complex
process theory of motivation,
including elements
of the theory of expectation
and the theory of justice.
What are the five variables
they have laid down as a basis?
These are the efforts spent,
the perception,
the results obtained,
the reward itself
for all this above,
and, of course,
the degree of satisfaction.
I spent my efforts,
I had the perception
that I am so effective,
so irreplaceable,
I have phenomenal results,
well, in principle,
the reward suits me,
but suddenly I find out
that Vasya Vasichkin
from the neighboring department
received a bonus of $100 more
than me.
To some extent,
my satisfaction will be zero
and all my efforts
from the previous four points
will be reduced to zero
because the theory of justice
will just rumble in me,
and the theory of expectations
will melt like smoke.
The results achieved
depend on the efforts,
abilities,
characteristic features
and awareness of their role.
The degree of confidence
is also important.
is that this level of effort
will really bring
a certain level of reward.
Where can there be
misunderstandings,
misunderstandings?
These are really
the efforts spent
and the results obtained.
It seems to me
that the level of confidence
is not what I expected.
But my boss thinks
otherwise.
Therefore, my reward
is not what I expected.
And in this theory,
of course,
a certain ratio
is established
between the reward
and the results.
And this ratio
is very important
to calculate correctly.
To position it correctly
and to convey it
to the employee correctly.
If you want to get
this reward,
describe clearly
what it should do and how.
And at each stage
what result do you expect from it?
Then he will consider
that he got it
fairly or unfairly
not received it.
Because, as a rule,
when a person has received
and there are no questions
according to his expectations,
it will be easier for you
to explain to your employee
that the theory of his expectations
and your theory of fairness
are just
in full correlation
with each other.
And there should be a complete
mutual understanding that
if he made more efforts
in these and in these places,
then his expectations in terms of reward
would be justified to a greater extent.
Let's continue our conversation
about the model of Porter-Lowler.
They explained the mechanism of motivation
as follows.
The results achieved by the employee
depend on
three variables.
1. The efforts spent.
2. Abilities.
3. Characteristics of a person.
And here, in the subsection,
consciousness plays
its role
in a certain process.
In this process of achieving results.
So, the efforts, abilities
and characteristics of a person
are spent.
Speaking from the employee's
own perspective,
the employee always takes into account
the efforts spent.
And what does the manager take into account
when comparing employees?
Is it only the efforts spent?
No. Abilities.
One is more capable than the other.
Or one has one ability,
the other has another.
Someone is very motorized,
and starts the project easily.
But in order to continue
the project to the end,
to do routine work,
for example,
you need people with different abilities
and characteristics.
For example, if you have cholera at the beginning,
then you have bloodsuckers and melancholy.
Therefore, the characteristics of a person
play a very important role
when achieving results.
Some people are more successful
and achieve more results,
others are less successful
and achieve fewer results.
Is it because
those who achieve fewer results
are not in their place,
do not do their job,
and in general,
should we ask the question
that maybe we should change them
to more successful ones?
The question is complex.
Maybe. Or maybe not.
Because not all people can be equally successful.
And not every person
can be equally successful
from year to year.
There are always ups and downs
for every person.
And another
very interesting point
that should be noted
is that the level of effort
in turn depends
on the value of the reward
and on how much
a person believes
in this connection
between his expenses and efforts
and the possibility of receiving
this reward.
A very important remark
is the value of the reward.
If a person is not interested
in his $100 bonus
because it is not money for him,
he will not
spend
the maximum of his efforts
very effectively.
If $100 bonus is a matter
of life and death,
the result will be completely different.
If the value of the reward
is not money,
and, for example,
if a person does it,
he will have a career growth
up the ladder.
And for him this value
will be extremely effective.
If he does not have such a goal,
he does not want to make a career.
I met many such people
because they are interested
in developing at a professional level.
By the way, salaries also move
in two directions.
Here we have a career vector
and a vector of professionalism.
If before the higher the manager
in the position, the more salary,
now colossal salaries
are required to become a professional.
To do this, you do not need to occupy
a high position in management,
it is enough to be a professional
in your field, a guru,
to receive often more
than a top manager.
That is, the value of the reward,
if a career prospect opens up for me
and I am interested in it,
I will work.
If not, then no.
And it is very important
to determine
what other achievements
require a level of result
can attract
internal rewards.
What else is important for a person?
We have already talked about the award.
Praise.
Promotion in service.
That is, if I am awarded
with all the company,
I think that
such a goal is worthy
of my efforts.
Here is such a model
combining the theory of expectation
with the theory of justice.
It was created, by the way,
very interesting.
Again, applicable.
How many people,
how many theories,
how many different adherents
of this approach.
Each model is interesting,
applicable in practice.
I think that
some of the listed things
that we have studied today,
that you will take into account,
you have already used,
you will use.
In any case,
these are existing models,
they work and are applied
in practice in companies.
In conclusion,
we will talk a little,
we will summarize
and talk about
what we have studied today
and how we can use it.
The first,
probably, are the questions
that the head of any link
should ask himself
on motivation.
After listening, analyzing
all the material,
think and ask yourself,
what do my subordinates need?
There are two directions.
The first one.
What do my subordinates need?
And the list.
What do they need?
For example, more attention
from the head, that is, from me.
More attention to details,
to some informal groups.
That is, to determine
what exactly is interesting for them.
Probably, to use
an annual interview for this.
Or just to talk to people,
to organize a meeting,
to discuss.
The second step,
which prompts this question,
the second option is
do I know what they need at all?
Maybe you know
and will quickly write a list.
Or have you not thought about it at all?
Should they need something?
They are paid so much,
everything is fine.
Think about it.
In what world
do the needs satisfy
during the activity
aimed at achieving the goal of the organization?
That is, your organization has some goals
and there are people.
And how much
these goals and needs of people
who work in the organization
for these goals are satisfied?
That is, if people are satisfied,
it is clear that the organization
will achieve these goals.
Another question.
If the satisfaction of work
and productivity
of employees has increased,
why did it happen?
That's a good question.
Indeed.
And if they have not grown,
why did it happen?
When they have grown,
they usually ask
why?
They never ask so strictly.
Why are you so effective?
Interestingly,
in my practice,
Western managers
asked managers
why they had such
large sales this year,
even with a voice complaint.
The managers were shocked.
They said,
they sell so much more
than planned.
A very reasonable answer.
You had the wrong budget.
You lowered the budget.
The budget should be different.
If the budget was not 100,
but 120,
and the implementation is 125,
then the bonus would be
only 5%
for the re-implementation of the budget
of 120.
Otherwise, it turns out 25,
because the budget was 100.
Everything is interconnected.
The effective work can
make the management happy.
Sometimes it will make you happy
when the organization is formed,
and sometimes it won't.
It means that
something was planned wrong.
When you ask questions,
other questions arise.
How to measure
the results of the work?
Can it be measured?
How can it be measured?
If it is possible to measure
and how often should it be evaluated?
How much did we achieve
our goals?
If we have not advanced enough,
we know why
and what to do
to not fail
in business next year
and not be out of the market.
Do not leave it.
Do not lose your share
in the market, your interest, your margin.
These questions are very correct.
And it is true that
the result of the work is
not only the financial result.
Remember, we talked about
the depth of the hierarchy,
the depth of the structure.
Then the question of the organizational
health index arises.
The health index
and the survey of the
health index
are the main
questions.
The health index
and surveys
help us
measure the result
of the work,
the motivation of the staff,
the assessment of the work
of people.
All these things,
surveys, reviews,
surveys, give us the opportunity
to see the picture
of all our
victories and defeats
very clearly.
They give us a good opportunity
to analyze
what we need to do,
how to act correctly,
or at least
where to look for
answers to these
very difficult questions.
These questions
often depend on
whether
companies will stay in the market.
The next group
is not about questions,
but about advice.
Although,
we can also give you some information
to think about.
Some advice on
meeting the social needs of the staff.
Now we will repeat
what we have learned.
Remember, social needs
are the third and the fourth
group of steps
in the pyramid of oils.
In order to satisfy
these needs of the staff,
what should you do
as a manager?
Give the employees
a job
that would help
them communicate.
If you see that you have
employees who have
a strong need,
it is important for them
as air,
communication is air,
try to find
an application for them.
Maybe they will
work in a corporate newspaper,
maybe they will work in corporate
departures,
maybe they will
work in a company
that is not necessarily
their job,
but it will give them
an opportunity to express themselves.
Create a team spirit.
We have already talked about
the importance of
a team spirit.
Of course, hold
meetings with your employees.
It is very important
to inform your employees
about what is going on in the company.
Why is it important?
First, it gives you an opportunity
to understand the feedback
of your employees
in addition to satisfying
the social needs of the staff.
What worries them?
What bothers them?
Stop rumors.
It is also a very interesting topic.
Rumors in the organization are sometimes
created on purpose, sometimes they are cultivated.
It is a completely different topic.
But they also need to be controlled.
Even if you create them for some reason,
they also need to be controlled,
you also need to keep your hand on the pulse.
These meetings will help
to manage these things.
Do not try to destroy
the existing informal groups.
If, of course, they do not
bring some negative component
to the organization,
or do not cause damage,
it is not worth it.
On the contrary,
take the most out of this benefit.
And, of course,
create some conditions
for the members of your organization
outside of its framework.
Corporate parties, for example.
A great option.
Satisfaction of the need
for respect for the staff.
How can this be done?
Offer subordinate more substantive work.
For example,
without adding a deposit,
without changing your position,
just say, seeing that a person has
such a huge rush,
say, listen, help is needed.
Help in this direction,
in this project.
Can you help?
Your knowledge is irreplaceable.
This level is very necessary.
A person will be happy.
If a person has this need,
he will be happy.
He will be satisfied and will not
require a reward,
because the reward for him,
the respect and trust he has
is already a reward.
Provide your employees
a positive feedback
on the results.
Remember, we talked about
the fact that there is a knot,
and that it is better to refuse punishment.
Right. It is better to encourage.
I encouraged these people,
I also wanted others to be encouraged.
They will try.
What are they worse at?
They also want to be good.
Attract your employees
to the development of decisions.
Trust, again, trust and respect.
Consult,
learn their opinion.
Often they can suggest
absolutely ideal options
to get out of difficult situations.
Often they seem to be dead ends.
Our people are very smart, talented, creative.
When you ask them,
they say, why are you silent?
And no one asked.
Ideas are amazing.
And, of course,
the property of delegating
subordinates of additional rights
and powers comes from this.
Of course, they will ask you.
If I trust you,
I will ask you.
You will answer me.
Not me to cover you,
but you will answer for me.
Not for me, but for yourself.
As a manager,
a person is responsible for all the mistakes of the department.
And the manager who says
that I am not Sidorov is a fool.
A normal manager will never say that.
He will say, I am to blame.
Yes, because you are the manager,
you are paid salary.
As a manager, you are obliged
to take all the risks.
But delegating
is clear that
if something goes wrong,
the manager will be punished
for the project lost.
Even for delegating.
But this blow
should also be able to keep.
This is professionalism.
And also an important point.
If there is an opportunity
to promote subordinates on the career ladder.
Again, the hierarchy in the company
22 steps, 6 steps.
More can be promoted,
less can be promoted.
But you can promote inside the steps.
Remember, we just talked about
that there is a career ladder
upstairs and professional.
The professional can be
younger, older, leading, guru.
Let's say,
several steps on this flat line
we drew.
There is such an opportunity
promotion.
It's a ladder,
but a career ladder.
And salary also depends on it.
And education.
It's a great motivator.
People improve their level,
competence, qualification
and communicate.
By the way, education can be attributed
to the satisfaction of socialization.
During the training,
if people from different departments are mixed,
they often get to know each other
because they have never had to meet.
The needs in self-expression of the staff.
How to satisfy them?
Provide subordinates
with the opportunity to learn and develop.
Look, the learning and development
goes through all the needs.
We respect you,
trust you,
we believe that you are loyal,
that you will not leave us,
we invest money in you,
we count on you.
Socialization.
You can talk to people,
compare yourself with others.
Self-expression.
During the training,
you can show yourself,
you will be noticed,
maybe we will look at you with different eyes.
From different sides,
education is a very motivating factor.
The main thing is to use it correctly.
And the results of the training.
To give subordinates a difficult job,
requiring them to give their all.
This is the highest trust.
And of course,
people have a colossal self-expression.
Because something new
is absolutely for them,
it mobilizes.
And they are more effective.
Not only what they did routinely,
but this is what captures them,
attracts.
Again, those who are motivated by it.
And to start developing
creative abilities in every possible way.
If the company has the opportunity,
to direct these people
to some different projects.
Well,
that's all for today.
Dear colleagues,
I hope that your time
was not wasted in vain.
In any case,
I really hope that all the material
that we discussed today
will be useful for you.
And that the lecture was interesting.
It seems to me that
I will not make any special recommendations
on reading books,
literature on this topic.
Because, again,
I repeat,
read the primary sources.
It is very interesting.
Actually,
it will be your communication with the author.
If we remember Munchausen,
remember when he said
that he communicates directly with Shakespeare.
Please communicate directly
if you are interested in Freud,
Maslow,
with other theorists.
Because, probably,
this will be the most correct communication
not through the prism
of someone else's perception.
It will be only you
and only the person
who was the founder of the theory.
And, of course,
read the primary sources.
Because all the others
have worked on it,
but in any case,
the basis was laid
by some specific theorist.
Start working
on it if it is interesting for you.
And, in principle,
all the knowledge that you have received today
will be more than enough
for you as a manager
to first of all
look at yourself,
at what kind of person you are,
what company you work in,
what style of management you have,
how you work with your subordinates,
whether you can motivate them,
whether you can listen to them,
how you recruited your staff,
how you plan
your employees' career growth.
All those aspects
that are very important
for your subordinates,
for your employees,
and for you in relation to your management
will be the necessary factors for your life.
Thank you very much for your attention.